---
title: "A Q on models for the Bunga Boys"
date: 2023-04-03
description: "I asked a question about models and transparency to a podcast."
image: 
tags:
   - podcast
   - models  
   - transparency
   - state
---

I like the Bungacast (formerly known as 'Aufhebunga Bunga') – "the global politics podcast at the end of the end of history". If you hate political theory blethering about *technofeudalism* and *degrowth communism* then, by jesus, you're sure gonna hate this! Works for me though (actually I've a terrible memory for facts so I'm pretty useless at discussing current events. But I do like chin-stroking theorising and open questions like this pod provides. I'd love to be on-point and detailed focused but alas, I have sieve-brain and hang out with the chin-strokers).

They had an episode recently about [covid and lockdowns](https://bungacast.com/2023/02/14/321-covid-dissensus-ft-toby-green-thomas-fazi/). I don't really agree with their anti-lockdown bent, or know enough to disagree with the consensus is probably a better way of putting it. But it did make me think again about the power of models in state decision making.  

It's fair to say the covid models were the most powerful predictive models ever used. Entire countries locked down, opened and closed down again based on what was predicted would happen through epidemiology models. But other issues of huge  

I wondered what the guys thought about the power of states using models. And whether there's any hope for transparency and accountability. Or if they're just another tool to move decision making away from the masses. 

----

> Q to consider for Aufhebonus Bonus episode.\
> \
> Mainly, it's about the likely future of state decision making through modelling.  Take three huge topics where predictive modelling is prevalent – covid, the economy and the climate. A lot of decision making in these domains seems to be "well we'd like to do X, but if we do X then ours models say Y will happen – so the only course of action is Z" (Z being lockdowns, austerity, some government over or under-reach). And because the general public don't have the knowledge or skills or access we kind of have to accept the apparent recommendation of 'the model' without much ability to cogently rebut or protest.\
> \
> It seems models are the next step up again in to technocracy. It's not just unaccountable technocrats, it's technocrats relying on data experts who in turn rely on models. This process get even further out of reach as states roll-out extremely complex AI techniques for entirely automated decisions making – [the AI says you shouldn't get welfare](https://www.theguardian.com/society/2020/aug/24/councils-scrapping-algorithms-benefit-welfare-decisions-concerns-bias). So the elected politician doesn't understand the advisor who doesn't understand the data scientist who doesn't understand the model but they all still obey its decisions.\
> \
> But where to go from all this? Don't use large amounts of data? Only use interpretable models? And whose interpretation anyway?\
> \
> p.s. I live in a very rainy place and really need weather forecasts, please don't take them away from me.\
>  \
> Thanks, it was nice getting this thought of my head since reading [Escape from Model Land](https://basicbooks.uk/titles/erica-thompson/escape-from-model-land/9781529364873/).
